Clan Battle-Born is one of the oldest clans in Skyrim and shares a heritage of great warriors. Both the Gray-Manes and the Battle-Borns can trace their lineage back to Ysgramor and the Five Hundred Companions. In contemporary times, they are considered one of the wealthiest and most influential families in Whiterun, with titles and strong ties to the Imperial Legion.
They reside in their clan house in the Wind District within Whiterun's walls. They also own a highly profitable farm outside Whiterun.
The Battle-Borns were once "fast friends" with the Grey-Manes, another old clan in Whiterun, before the civil war began. However, they are now bitter enemies, with the Battle-Borns loyal to the Empire, and the Gray-Manes supporting the Stormcloaks. Olfrid Battle-Born believes that the Gray-Manes detest his family because they envy their wealth.
Alfhild Battle-Born is a Nord farmer of the Battle-Born clan who resides in Whiterun.Alfhild has a pacifistic nature. She dislikes war and thinks of it as pointless and stupid. She also has great concerns about her son because he gets beaten.She is the daughter of Olfrid and Bergritte Battle-Born. Her brother is Jon Battle-Born of which she thinks highly. She is married to Idolaf Battle-Born, with whom he has a son, Lars Battle-Born. Alfhild's role in the family is to maintain the Battle-Born Farm.Alfhild has little against the Gray-Mane clan and thinks of the feud as stupid and unnecessary.As with the feud between her family and the Gray-Mane clan she thinks the Civil War is pointless and credits her brother, Jon, for staying out of it.
Bergritte Battle-Born is an elderly Nord who resides in the city of Whiterun.She is a member of the Battle-Born Clan and is married to Olfrid, the patriarch of the Clan. She is the mother of Alfhild and the grandmother of Lars Battle-Born.
Idolaf Battle-Born is a Nord found in the city of Whiterun. Like the rest of his family, he favors the Imperial Legion in the Civil War. He is married to Alfhild with whom he has a son named Lars.
Jon Battle-Born is a Nord living in Whiterun.His clan, the Battle-Borns, are known supporters of the Empire. He is the son of Bergritte, and brother of Alfhild Battle-Born. He can be seen around Belethor's General Goods. Perhaps due to his relationship with Olfina Gray-Mane, he seems unimpressed with the Civil War. He is implied to be a bit of a romantic (or at least less of a traditional Nordic warrior) compared to the rest of the family, both in his appreciation of Nordic culture and his disdain for the war-oriented Nordic mindset. He seems to despise Mikael because of his misuse of his bard knowledge saying that he only sings for the money and the women.
Lars Battle-Born is a Nord child who lives with his family in the house of Clan Battle-Born in Whiterun.His best friend is Mila Valentia, who loves to play hide and seek with him. Lars said that he and Mila often got into mischief, but his parents shaped him up, and he kept getting into trouble with his father.Olava the Feeble is another one of Lars' friends. Lars says this and continues to say that Olava says things will get better for him, once he starts to stick up for himself.He can most often be seen around in the city street or sitting in his room in the house of Clan Battle-Born.
Olfrid Battle-Born is a Nord magnate and the patriarch of the Battle-Born clan in Whiterun.He is married to Bergritte Battle-Born and together they have two children; Jon and Alfhild Battle-Born. Alfhild has a child named Lars Battle-Born, who is Olfrid's grandson. His family owns Battle-Born Farm, located directly east of Whiterun.Just like most members of the Battle-Born family he heartily dislikes the Gray-Mane clan, but does not dispute that they are one of the most respected clans in all of Skyrim.He claims that the Battle-Born are rich due to their largely successful farm, and that the Gray-Manes are jealous of his clan's success, resulting in the feud.