The Companions are the warriors guild of Skyrim. It serves a similar function to the Fighters Guild chapters of other regions of Tamriel. Eorlund Gray-Mane, a blacksmith in Whiterun, states that they have been leaderless since Ysgramor. He says that an elder known as Kodlak Whitemane acts as the Harbinger (counselor). The fact that they have no official leader is emphasized by their name.
Jorrvaskr, the mead hall where the Companions live and operate, is the oldest building in Whiterun.
Jorrvaskr is an ancient and honored mead hall that has served as the headquarters of a mercenary company, The Companions, for untold generations. It was built after the discovery of the Skyforge.
According to local legend, Jorrvaskr is the oldest building in Whiterun. It once existed by itself on the mountain, with the rest of the town springing up around it over the centuries. Jorrvaskr itself was originally a longboat made for the Return of the Five Hundred Companions of Ysgramor. Its captain was Jeek of the River, and its crew consisted of twenty-two men.
Upon arrival in Skyrim, Ysgramor commanded that his men go forth and settle in this new land. Jeek of the River and his crew split from the Circle of Captains and traveled southwards towards the area that was later named Whiterun Hold.
It was there they discovered a strange monument that later became known as the Skyforge. Jeek and his crew decided that the mysterious Skyforge could be of use to them. The wasteland surrounding the Skyforge was fit for harvest, and so began the labors of Menro and Manwe, whose eager hands again laid to the Atmoran wood which had born them all across the sea, their boat, Jorrvaskr, becoming their shelter.
The Skyforge is an ancient forge located next to Jorrvaskr in Whiterun, said to be even older than the Elves themselves.
The Skyforge was first discovered by Jeek of the River and his crew who were traveling south from Hsaarik Head to settle. They scouted the area later named Whiterun Hold and found a mysterious structure that was described as "a monument of a bird whose eyes and beak were opened in flame." It was discovered that the monument was feared by the native Elves and suspecting that it held great power, Jeek and his crew settled and built Jorrvaskr at the foot of the Skyforge, so it would provide their steel.
Under the Skyforge is "The Underforge," where The Circle holds its meetings and worships Hircine. There is also a passage to the right of the stone bowl that leads to a secret one-way exit out of the city. It is here that the Dragonborn is inducted into the Circle by a blood ritual involving Aela the Huntress and Skjor, thus gaining the ability to transform into a werewolf.
The forge is used mainly by Eorlund Gray-Mane to craft armor and weapons for The Companions. He also sells various Skyforge weapons.
The Companions can trace their origins from the Five Hundred Companions which the legendary army Ysgramor raised to wage war against the snow elves and avenge the Night of Tears. After defeating the snow elves in the Nordic-Falmer War, the remnants of the Five Hundred Companions went their separate ways to inhabit the unexplored lands of Tamriel. This period of exploration and colonization is known as The Return.
Several hundred years after the death of Ysgramor, the Companions had converted into soldiers for hire. Their services could be purchased for the fighting of wars, but the commitment to individual honor meant that often Shield-Brothers would be forced to face each other on the field of battle. Since the conflict of interests between its members was jeopardizing their bonds of honor, Harbinger Mryfwiil, in his wisdom, decreed that they would no longer be party to any war or political conflict of any kind. Because of his steady hand, the Companions today are known as impartial arbiters of honor, in addition to their glories on the field of battle.
By the end of the First Era, the Companions have begun to do away with rigid rules of Atmoran racial purity and recruited people of different races and walks of life to fill their ranks. After the dark periods in the late Second Era, when a string of false and dishonorable Harbingers laid claim to Jorrvaskr, it was Kyrnil Long-Nose who gathered the true hearts of the Companions in the wilds and stormed Jorrvaskr itself, killing the usurpers and returning honor through blood, in the old ways. He began the tradition of trusted advisors called the Circle (named after Ysgramor's council of captains) who would serve as examples to the younger, newer Companions.
Jorrvaskr is the home of the Companions and is located on the eastern side of Whiterun in the Wind District. Jorrvaskr sits at the base of the Skyforge, which is an ancient forge from which special weapons and armor are crafted by Eorlund Gray-Mane. The Skyforge creates the finest steel in Tamriel, which is why Jorrvaskr was erected in this location.The inside serves as both the Companions' lodging and mead hall where they sleep, tell tales of valor, and occasionally fight each other.
On the southern wall of the mead hall is a special area created to hold the fragments of Wuuthrad.
Wuuthrad is a powerful battleaxe that was originally wielded by Ysgramor, the legendary leader of the Five Hundred Companions, during the Nordic-Falmer War which took place across much of Skyrim and Solstheim in the Merethic Era.
The Companions also have a secret. All members of the Circle are werewolves and, as such, the guild is in constant conflict with a band of werewolf hunters known as the Silver Hand.
Aela the Huntress is a Nord, thief and member of The Companions. She is one of five members of The Circle. Residing in Jorrvaskr with the other Companions. She is an expert level Archery trainer.
It is rumored among the Companions that Aela and Skjor have a very intimate relationship with one another; Njada Stonearm's conversations with Aela reveals this. However, Aela hastily and vehemently denies the relationship, to the point of even threatening Njada if she pays attention to them.
Athis is a Dunmer warrior and a member of The Companions.He resides in The Companions' mead hall, Jorrvaskr, in Whiterun. He is an Expert-level trainer in One-handed combat, and is also the only Dunmer among the current ranks of the Companions.
Athis originally came from Morrowind, mentioning that he had to "crawl out" of the province. At some point, he joined the Companions, though he originally didn't think that they'd accept him, likely due to the fact that he is an elf.
Athis tends to keep quiet most of the time, and dislikes answering questions more than once. He is civil and loyal, but never at the forefront of any battles. He shows an apprehension of being near the Skyrim-Morrowind border.
Brill is a Nord who lives in Whiterun. He resides in the Companions' headquarters, Jorrvaskr, but he is not a member himself.
Brill stays with the Companions because he was once saved by Vignar Gray-Mane, and now he offers his services to him.
Vilkas is a Nord resident of Whiterun. He is the Master at Arms of the Companions and a member of the Circle, the most formidable and experienced of their warriors. Like the rest of the Companions, he lives in Jorrvaskr in the Wind District of Whiterun. He is a Master-level trainer in two-handed weaponry.
Farkas is a lycanthropic Nord who is a member of The Circle, one of the most formidable and experienced warriors in the Companions. Like the rest of the Companions, he lives in Jorrvaskr in the Wind District of Whiterun. He is a Master-level trainer in Heavy Armor.
Farkas and his twin brother Vilkas were raised at Jorrvaskr by Jergen, who rescued them from a circle of necromancers. It is unknown if he was their biological father. Jergen left to fight in the Great War but never returned.
Both brothers eventually became official members of the Companions and rose to the ranks of the Circle. They were said to be the youngest members to ever join, though this may be a play on words by Vignar Gray-Mane, referring to the twins' young age during their residence at Jorrvaskr rather than the age at which their membership became official.
Farkas calls Jergen his father, and considers the Companions his family. He is especially close to his brother and follows along with his views in most situations.
Kodlak states in his journal that Farkas is "too kindhearted" to be Harbinger. Farkas is also the first of the Companions, apart from Kodlak, to be genuinely friendly and welcoming toward the Dragonborn when they join the order.
Vilkas jokes about Farkas being the more dim-witted of the two. Other Companions will also insult Farkas' intelligence by calling him "icebrain" or "oaf." Farkas takes the teasing from people he likes, but states that he will punch anyone else who thinks he is not smart.
He takes great pride in his physical strength, and notes that he enjoys the added strength of his Beast Form. He prefers to resolve problems through bludgeoning and leave the thinking to others if possible.
The Harbinger was a command-based rank in the Five Hundred Companions, a legendary group of warriors who came from Atmora during the Merethic Era, when Men were first beginning to settle in Tamriel.
Kodlak Whitemane is the Harbinger of the Companions in who resides in Whiterun. As Harbinger, he does not give orders, but his word is highly respected in Jorrvaskr and across all nine Holds of Skyrim. Kodlak is also a member of The Circle, though he wishes to be rid of his lycanthropy, since upon death, a werewolf's soul goes to the Daedric Prince Hircine's hunting grounds. Kodlak does not wish for this to be his fate and instead wants his soul to go to Sovngarde, the Nordic afterlife.
Kodlak was found by the previous Harbinger, Askar, in Hammerfell. Sometime after this, Kodlak succeeded Askar as Harbinger. Kodlak has commanded the Companions for twenty years, balancing his tactical skill, ferocity in combat, and commanding presence. However, those days are drawing to a close. One year before the return of the dragons, Kodlak contracted the rot, despite werewolves having a 100% disease immunity. His condition has reached its final stages of deterioration, making him weak in body. In frustration, he has taken to locking himself behind closed doors and poring over old documents, desperate to cure himself of lycanthropy before the rot ends his life.
Kodlak Whitemane proves to be a benign and wise individual for such a rowdy group. As Harbinger, he is the one that helps channel the Companions' skills in a way that can benefit Skyrim's people, rather than leaving them to brawl and drink all day long. His wisdom is respected throughout the nine holds, as well.
Kodlak proves to be very wise and perceptive. He could see the Dragonborn's potential instantly, aside from the fact he had seen them in a dream.
Njada Stonearm is a Nord and a member of the Companions. She can be found within the Companions' headquarters, Jorrvaskr, in Whiterun. She is an Expert-level trainer in Block.
Njada has an unpleasant attitude and uncaring disposition. She has few friends, which is what she prefers.
Ria is the newest member of The Companions. She is also the only Imperial currently in the ranks. She resides in Whiterun, and can be found within or just behind Jorrvaskr.
Ria states she has dreamed of being a Companion since she was a little girl, and is very enthusiastic about her membership. She is determined to fight and die alongside her Shield-Siblings.
Shield-Brother and Shield-Sister are phrases of respect used by the Companions. Several companions and military Nords use the term.[1] Being a Shield-Brother or Shield-Sister means one fighting without fear or hesitation in the defense of their other Shield-Brothers and Sisters, and always have their back. Companions generally suggest that people never go on a dangerous task without having a Shield-Sibling with them.
Skjor is a Nordic member of the Companions and one of The Circle. According to dialogue between various Companions, Skjor is one of the highest-ranked members of The Circle, quite possibly next to Kodlak Whitemane.
Before becoming a Companion, Skjor fought in the Great War against the Third Aldmeri Dominion before becoming critically injured in the fighting. After he recovered from his injuries, he became a sellsword for hire across Skyrim, and eventually joined the Companions.
Torvar is a Nord warrior, and a member of the Companions who resides within Jorrvaskr in Whiterun. He is one of the Companions' newer members.
Torvar is shown to be a drunk, as many of his comments are concerned with drink. He doesn't take well to the intensive training, and argues with Farkas about not being allowed to go out and fight. In a conversation between him and Athis, he states a preference for hammers and axes.