Five Hundred Companions, often simply called the Five Hundred or Companions, were a group of Atmoran warriors led by the legendary Ysgramor in the late Merethic Era. The Five Hundred Companions were an army of fierce conquerers who played a vital role during events of the time period known as The Return. Their initial goal was to avenge the brothers and sisters who fell victims of elves during their raid known as Night of Tears. However, after Saarthal was reclaimed, they would continue to press against the other peoples of the continent, attempting to conquer all of Mereth and much of Tamriel.
During the Merethic Era, a group of Atmorans, led by Ysgramor, left their homeland called Atmora and sailed to Tamriel due to the presence of a civil war in Atmora. They sailed south and eventually landed at Hsaarik Head at the northern tip of Broken Cape. They moved inland and soon built the legendary city Saarthal. They befriended the local Snow Elves and made peace and prosperity with them.
Despite this coexistence, the Snow Elves launched a sudden assault upon Saarthal in which they sacked the city and killed everyone there, with the exception of Ysgramor and his two sons, Yngol and Ylgar, who survived and returned to Atmora. Different reports stated different theories as to why the Snow Elves broke the peace with the Atmorans. Some reports suggest that the initial attack on Saarthal was very focused, and did not appear to correlate to any locations that were established as points of defense or importance. Not only did the Snow Elves know the apparent layout of the city, but their assault appeared to be based on a specific directive and perhaps a singular goal. One theory was that the Snow Elves' motive was to exterminate all of the Atmorans in Skyrim, as the rate at which the Atmorans' population was growing was increasing. To the Snow Elves, this would be a potential threat to their existence in Skyrim. Another theory was that the Atmorans discovered a powerful artifacts deep below Saarthal, called the Eye of Magnus, and the Snow Elves coveted it for themselves, so they sacked Saarthal.
Ysgramor, Yngol, and Ylgar fled northward in the sole remaining ship they had. After they returned to Atmora, they told stories of Elven treachery and murders in Saarthal. Men and women of Atmora quickly assembled an army to avenge the fallen and claim Mereth for themselves. Ysgramor—inspired by his Elven enemies' affinity for knowledge—created an alphabet for written Atmoran speech, thus giving the Five Hundred the ability to document the best ways to kill Elves.
On the Day of Final Passage the Five Hundred set sail for Mereth using longboats that had been made in the massive shipyards of Jylkurfyk. On the way there, a massive storm broke out, known as the Storm of Separation; its namesake comes from how Ylgar and his ship, the Darumzu, were knocked away from others and delayed. The storm also destroyed several vessels in the fleet; Yngol's ship, the Harakk, was among those sunk, thus making him and his crew the first of the dead.
After regrouping at Hsaarik Head, the warriors sought to reclaim Saarthal and avenge those slain there. With the combined might of the Five Hundred Companions, Saarthal was retaken, sending the Snow Elf forces back toward their cities. Though some of the Companions did not survive, the Ysgramor's people retained the name "The Five Hundred Companions" in honor of their fallen Shield-Siblings.
After reclaiming Saarthal, the Five Hundred formed the Circle of Captains. Ysgramor commanded that the Snow Elves be conquered utterly, beginning a long period of the slaughter of Mer and heralding the grand expansion of Men on Tamriel. He ordered for each Captain to take their crew on a unique path, seeking their fates throughout Skyrim and the world. Now unbound from Atmora, many of the crews converted their ships to buildings or even burned them ceremoniously, claiming all of Tamriel to be their kingdom. The Five Hundred did not limit their attacks to Snow Elves, and they fought many of the peoples of Tamriel concurrently. Ysgramor himself warred against the giants and their leader, Sinmur the Terrible, until all—including the mighty Sinmur—were gone. Other groups left Skyrim, fighting with elves in the east or with Argonians in Black Marsh.
The exploits of all of these crews branch out from one another in their unified goal of conquest. The Chrion's crew went toward Red Mountain and engaged the Elves there, massacring them despite the populations there being passive. The Fallowfire went south and conquered The Rift from Snow Elves, reveling in the process until eventually creating Fallowstone Hall after losses. The Jorrvaskr founded Whiterun Hold, fighting against Snow Elves prior to the Hold but meeting little resistance when they founded Whiterun. The Kaal Kaaz were closely linked with Ysgramor's personal retinue, fighting against the Snow Elves at their side for a while, though their exact actions in Skyrim afterward are unknown. The Krilot Lok decided to remain on the sea, sailing to various places with coastal access; this included Black Marsh, Elsweyr, and even the continent of Yokuda. The crew of the Sadon Reyth are less documented than the other crews, though they did assist Ysgramor and the Kaal Kaaz in fighting the Snow Elves. The Ylgermet—led by Ysgramor himself—would battle various factions in Eastmarch, eventually building Windhelm on the backs of Snow Elf prisoners. Despite their diaspora, though, the various Companion groups swore to defend anyone of Atmoran ancestry if ever required, thus remaining a united front. Only a few distant Snow Elf bastions, such as the island of Solstheim, remained.
The city of Windhelm was built near Yngol's burial mound, supposedly so that Ysgramor could look upon it and know that his family line, now in their new home, knew more peace than Atmora before it. Despite this belief, however, Ysgramor and The Companions continued his conquest of the Snow Elves, and so the expansion and slaughter by the Five Hundred only slowed with Ysgramor's own final breath. A huge, dark storm was said to have been seen all over Tamriel, leaving even the fiercest warriors grieving for their leader. Most of the Five Hundred at last ceased their conquest out of respect for Ysgramor, thus ending the period known as The Return.
The Return's end soon saw the remaining Five Hundred Companions lose their grip over Tamriel, with many becoming simple settlers and farmers of the land. Though only remnants of the once great army were present, the Atmorans had successfully created the province of Skyrim, founding the Ysgramor Dynasty with the completion of Windhelm.
Members of the Fallowfire crew, in their exploits in The Rift, would engage the Snow Elves until their captain, Gurilda Sharktooth, was slain in battle. The first mate, Vikord One-Ear, decreed that his crew would cease their conquest and create a great hall, eventually building Fallowstone Hall. The group would evolve from their original Five Hundred roots, becoming known merely as "The Companions." By the time of the Three Banners War, the faction would be well-respected by the High King of western Skyrim, Jorunn the Skald-King, and assisted the Ebonheart Pact.
The crew of Five Hundred Companions who were led by Jeek the River would settle around the Skyforge, largely retaining the spirit of the original Five Hundred. Jeek would be the first Captain to halt his conquest and instead seek out settlement, wanting to protect those in his company who were less skilled in battle. Thus, Jeek became the first Harbinger of this new iteration of The Companions. The group would give on on its original name and became simply known as "The Companions," similarly to the Fallowfire crew.
By the Fourth Era, traditions and goals had changed over time; though the leader of The Companions was still named the "Harbinger," none had held the weight that Ysgramor had, and instead, the newer Harbingers served more as advisors than a hierarchal leader. Similarly, The Circle of Captains would evolve into The Circle, which served as the official leadership. Alongside being a Companion, some members had also embraced lycanthropy, bestowed upon them by Hircine; this would eventually include all members of The Circle. The motives of the Companions were much different by the Fourth Era; the Companions had become more of a mercenary group who hunted beasts and criminals rather than Mer. Companion groups were no longer under the control of Captains, since sailing and settlement were no longer driving racial concerns. They have sworn off war and political conflict of all kinds since the time of Harbinger Mryfwiil the Withdrawn.
Ysgramor was an Atmoran warrior and the leader of the Five Hundred Companions. He is one of the most legendary heroes of Men, who played a pivotal role in the ascendancy of humans on the continent of Tamriel in the late Merethic Era, during the period known as The Return.
Ysgramor is also considered the first human historian, as he developed a runic transcription of Nordic speech based on Elven principles. Ysgramor's lasting influence on human history across Tamriel earned him such sobriquets as the "First Man," the "Bringer of Words," and "Harbinger of Us All" in bardic tradition and the accounts of historians.
