Clan Gray-Mane is a one of the two major clans in Whiterun, the other being ther rival, Clan Battle-Born
Both the Gray-Manes and the Battle-Borns can trace their lineage back to Ysgramor and the Five Hundred Companions. Some Gray-Manes, such as Eorlund and Vignar Gray-Mane, show loyalty to their past as members or associates of the Companions. The Gray-Manes' clan-fathers have worked the Skyforge ever since the first Gray-Manes came to Whiterun. Eorlund Gray-Mane is arguably the best blacksmith in all of Skyrim since only he is able to utilize the famous Skyforge. He forges Skyforge Steel weapons for the Companions and jewelry which his wife Fralia Gray-Mane sells at her stall in the marketplace of Whiterun.
The Gray-Manes and the Battle-Borns used to be very close, but ever since the start of the Civil War, the two families have been driven apart. The Gray-Manes are separatists and oppose the Empire of Tamriel, while supporting the Stormcloak rebellion. When asked about the root of the conflict, they will say that the Battle-Borns lack integrity and are arrogant about their wealthy status. The Battle-Born and the Gray-Manes are two of the oldest clans in Skyrim and the rift between them deepened after Thorald Gray-Mane disappeared. Although many say he just died, Fralia Gray-Mane and her son Avulstein Gray-Mane believes the Imperials have him alive and that the Battle-Borns have something to do with her son's disappearance.
Gray-Mane members: Vignar Gray-Mane,Thorald Gray-Mane,Avulstein Gray-Mane,Fralia Gray-Mane,Olfina Gray-Mane.
Vignar Gray-Mane, also known as Vignar the Revered, is an elderly Nord member of the Gray-Mane clan in Whiterun. He is a supporter of the Stormcloaks and respected figure in the city, albeit not by Olfrid Battle-Born.
Vignar has a brother, Eorlund Gray-Mane, who is married to Fralia. He is the uncle of Avulstein, Olfina and Thorald Gray-Mane.
Vignar was a commander in the Imperial Legion for thirty years; he fought in the Great War. He says when the Empire signed the White-Gold Concordat, it shamed everyone. The Gray-Manes and the Battle-Borns used to be friends, though that was until the Battle-Borns chose the Empire's side during the Civil war.
Vignar claims to have been a great warrior long ago and joined the Companions sometime in his youth. He seems to be the oldest member of The Companions; Kodlak suggests that he witnessed the rise and fall of about half a dozen Harbingers. Vilkas also mentions that he knows the Companions' history "as well as Vignar by now," except he can actually remember it.
Of all the Gray-Manes, Vignar seems to be the one who is most opposed to the Battle-Borns, with both women in the family having lines about the two clan's feud's stupidity, and the other men not commenting.
Thorald Gray-Mane is a Nord and a member of the Gray-Mane clan. He is the missing son of Eorlund and Fralia Gray-Mane, the brother of Avulstein and Olfina Gray-Mane, and the nephew of Vignar Gray-Mane.
Thorald aided the Stormcloaks to fight the Empire and disappeared sometime afterwards. Later on, it is discovered that he was captured by the Legion during a skirmish and that the Thalmor later took custody of him. He is held captive in Northwatch Keep.
Avulstein Gray-Mane is a Nord and member of the Gray-Mane clan, a well-established family in the city of Whiterun.
Avulstein Gray-Mane is the son of Eorlund and Fralia Gray-Mane, the brother of Olfina Gray-Mane and the missing Thorald Gray-Mane, and the nephew of Vignar Gray-Mane. He will be in the Gray-Mane clan house, hiding in one of the bedrooms. Upon opening the bedroom door, Avulstein will begin to speak, explaining that he is paranoid about meeting the same fate as his brother who is missing. He is certain that the Battle-Borns are behind the disappearance of his brother and wants proof stolen from their house.
Olfina Gray-Mane is a Nord barmaid in Whiterun. She is a part of the Gray-Mane clan and will become housecarl to Vignar Gray-Mane if he becomes Jarl of Whiterun, following the Battle for Whiterun's end in the favor of the Stormcloaks.
Similar to most Nords, Olfina considers herself to be a tough warrior maiden. She often makes her independence clear and scolds anyone that questions her decisions. Like the rest of her family, she supports the Stormcloak Rebellion.
Olfina is the daughter of Eorlund and Fralia Gray-Mane, sister to Avulstein and Thorald Gray-Mane and niece of Vignar Gray-Mane.
Olfina thinks that the feud between Gray-Mane and Battle-Born is stupid and wishes for it to end. One reason for this is that she is romantically involved with Jon Battle-Born, as can be seen from the Letter from Jon which can be pickpocketed from her.
Fralia Gray-Mane is an Elder Nord and the mother of Avulstein, Olfina, and Thorald, and wife of Eorlund. She operates a jewelry stall in the Whiterun marketplace.