Whiterun is the capital city of Whiterun Hold, in the center of Skyrim. In Whiterun, Nords live in the 'traditional' manner: their lives are simple, harsh, and rooted in ancient ideas. Even the city's fortifications—wooden and stone palisade walls and the sheer defensive advantage offered by its position on a large bluff that raises the city above the surrounding tundra—are archaic by contemporary standards.
Due to its central location, Whiterun serves as the commercial heart of Skyrim.
Whiterun is located on the eastern end of its Hold, in the tundra plains that fill the center of Skyrim. It was founded by Jeek of the River, who was the captain of Jorrvaskr. Upon discovery of the Skyforge, he and his men constructed the great mead hall of Jorrvaskr, which at the time was the sole structure on the bluff. Now, Whiterun is a large city, albeit one that retains the feel of a smaller Nord village. The central location and easy access make it one of the most successful cities in trade.
When approaching Whiterun, the towering fortress of Dragonsreach dominates the view. Its history can be traced back to the First Era, when King Olaf One-Eye subdued the great dragon Numinex in a legendary duel of Thu'um atop Mount Anthor and brought him back to the fledgling town as a captive. It was then that the magnificent keep was rebuilt and renamed to serve as a cage for Numinex, whose head still adorns the Great Hall.
Gjalund was the Jarl of Whiterun sometime in the First Era. As Jarl, his holdings included Whiterun, Granite Hill, Rorikstead, Old H'roldan, Bromjunaar, Korvanjund, Volunruud and Ivarstead.
Whiterun was once considered Skyrim's equivalent of the Imperial City, but in recent times has suffered from many problems. The Civil War, excessively harsh winters, harassment by Horme bandits, and the attacks of frost trolls have diminished the once-proud city.
It's a strategic city for both the Imperial Legion and the Stormcloaks because of its central location, however Jarl Balgruuf the Greater remains neutral in the conflict.
The city is home to two important dynastic families, the Gray-Manes and the Battle-Borns. Once on good terms with one another, they are currently bitter enemies, as a result of their differing views on the civil war conflict, as well as the economic disparity between both clans, since the Battle-Borns are wealthy and the Gray-Manes are modest. Upon entering the city, the Dragonborn is able to choose a side, either Battle-Born or Gray-Mane, although this is not necessary to interact with the city's shops and temple.
Whiterun is home to The Companions, a faction similar to the Fighters Guild of Cyrodiil. Their headquarters are in Jorrvaskr, a legendary mead hall that was built next to the Skyforge, an ancient forge that is said to be older than both men and Elves. The city of Whiterun itself was built around Jorrvaskr, which attracts warriors from all across Tamriel.
Plains District is the first district any visitor to Whiterun enters, named as such because it is the lowest of the three and therefore closest to the plains outside the city. It contains all the major merchants, the marketplace and Breezehome.
The Wind District is where most of Whiterun's residential buildings (including the mead hall Jorrvaskr and the Gildergreen) are located and was named because of the strong mountain winds that gust through the area.
The Cloud District is the smallest of Whiterun’s three districts. Its name is derived from the fact that it is located atop the bluff Whiterun was built on and is therefore closer to the clouds than any other. It is dominated by the imposing form of Dragonsreach.
The Bannered Mare, serving as Whiterun's most popular gathering place, functions as a tavern and inn that offers mead, food and a warm, welcoming fire. Almost anyone can be found in the tavern after the shops and stalls close. Its sign is that of a horse carrying a banner.
Arcadia's Cauldron is an alchemy shop that is located in the Plains District of the city of Whiterun, Whiterun Hold. The shop is owned by an Imperial named Arcadia.
Belethor's General Goods is a merchant's shop located in the Plains District of Whiterun. It can be found in the Whiterun Marketplace, next to Arcadia's Cauldron.The shop is open every day between 8 am and 8 pm. It's owned and run by Belethor and his assistant, Sigurd. Like most general goods stores, Belethor will trade in almost anything.
The Drunken Huntsman is a tavern and hunting shop specializing in archery located in the Plains District of Whiterun.The owner, Elrindir, explains the store was named after an incident involving him and his brother after they both consumed "rather too much mead" and went out to hunt - his brother mistook him for a deer and shot him in the rear with an arrow.Elrindir sells a wide assortment of armor and weapons, with an emphasis on bows and arrows, in addition to the tavern's usual fare of food and drink.
Warmaiden's is a weapons and armor smithy and shop in the Plains District of Whiterun. It can be found near the main city gate, across from the Drunken Huntsman.Owned by Adrianne Avenicci, the store was named after Adrianne's childhood nickname given to her by her father, due to her obsession with swords as a young girl.Adrianne's husband, Ulfberth War-Bear, helps with the shop and handles the sales while Adrianne concentrates on blacksmithing at her forge outside.
Whiterun Marketplace is in the Plains District of Whiterun and rivals The Bannered Mare as the most popular congregation spot in the city. When the marketplace is open, stalls sells various items, including fresh fruits and vegetables, meat, and jewelry.
Amren's House is a location in Whiterun. It is the home of Amren, his wife Saffir, and their daughter, Braith.
Breezehome is a purchasable home Located in Whiterun, Breezehome sits adjacent to Warmaiden's and Whiterun's Gate.
Carlotta Valentia's House is a home located in Whiterun. Carlotta Valentia lives in this house with her young daughter, Mila.
Heimskr's House is a house in Whiterun and the home of Heimskr, a priest of Talos. The small, one-room cottage is found in front and to the left of Jorrvaskr. It is one of three buildings that occupies the circle around the Gildergreen.
House Gray-Mane is the home of the Gray-Mane family in Whiterun.House Gray-Mane is the residence of Eorlund Gray-Mane and his children.It is a large, solid house, built by Eorlund over 35 years earlier. Outside the house is a small paddock with a cow. Inside the house is a central fire pit and dining area, with a small entrance alcove and Avulstein’s bedroom. Upstairs is a landing and two bedrooms with some books and valuables (usually necklaces) lying around.
House of Clan Battle-Born is a home found in Whiterun.This large house holds three generations of the equally large Clan Battle-Born. This warrior family—owners of the Battle-Born Farm outside Whiterun—has lived in the city for centuries; their ties to Skyrim and the ancient Nord ways are undisputed.
Olava the Feeble's House is a home of Olava. Besides being a seer, Olava is also something of a hermit. She rarely leaves her house, and her residence is usually locked.
Severio Pelagia's House is a house nestled above the market is the residence of Severio Pelagia, who owns the Pelagia Farm just outside Whiterun’s walls.
Uthgerd's House is the home of Uthgerd the Unbroken, though she is never seen in the house and spends all her time inside The Bannered Mare. It is in the Wind District of Whiterun, across the street from Carlotta Valentia's House. It consists of one room.
Ysolda's House is a home found in the Plains District of Whiterun. The house's owner and sole occupant is Ysolda.
Dragonsreach is Whiterun's keep in. It was constructed in the ornate wooden style of the great Nord longhouses of ancient days. Visually and politically, it is very much the focal point of the entire city itself and perhaps even Skyrim as a whole. As is true of the keeps in other cities, Dragonsreach serves many important functions.As the seat of government in Whiterun, Balgruuf the Greater resides here as its ruler. Dragonsreach is situated in the "Cloud District" of Whiterun and, as the name suggests, it is elevated from the rest of the city. According to the Jarl's steward, Proventus Avenicci, the building gained its name after a battle with a dragon that left the victorious party as "rulers of the clouds."According to legend, the palace today known as "Dragonsreach" was originally a smaller building. However, with the intent of creating a prison for the dragon Numinex after its defeat at the hands of Olaf One-Eye, the people of Whiterun added a stone prison to the keep and renamed it Dragonsreach. Though accounts vary on Olaf's position, the dragon's disposition, and the manner in which the dragon was captured, there seems to be little doubt about the history and purpose of the building.
The Guard Barracks are the sleeping quarters for the Whiterun Guards. They are located inside Whiterun, opposite of Warmaiden's.
There is another "Guard Barracks" on the other side of town, with more guards and more objects.
Born from the branches of the Eldergleam Tree, the Gildergreen is a tree that stands in the center of Whiterun, near the Temple of Kynareth. Followers of Kynareth revere the plant for its relation to the Eldergleam.
The Hall of the Dead is a funerary structure that contains the bodies of the deceased. There is one in every major city in Skyrim.
The Temple of Kynareth is a temple to Kynareth that is located in Whiterun.Accessible from Whiterun's Wind District, the temple is typically used as a place of worship and healing. Danica Pure-Spring and her apprentice, Acolyte Jenssen, tend to the sick citizens of Whiterun Hold, such as the Wounded Soldier and the Sickly Farmer.
Battle-Born Farm is a wheat mill and farm.The farm is located due east outside of Whiterun. As the farm's name implies, it is owned by the Battle-Born clan; although, Gwendolyn lives in the house by herself. Alfhild Battle-Born works with Gwendolyn in the fields during the daytime but returns to Whiterun at night.Nearby is an old Whiterun watchtower that serves as an exit point for The Underforge.
Chillfurrow Farm is a small wheat mill and farm located just outside of Whiterun, and is owned by Nazeem and Ahlam.
Honningbrew Meadery is a settlement. It lies just southeast of Whiterun. Honningbrew mead is brewed at the meadery, which has made it famous across Skyrim. It consists of two buildings: The meadery itself and the boilery.
The Whiterun stable is owned and operated by Skulvar Sable-Hilt. The stables itself offers a black horse for purchase.