Farengar, serves as the court wizard for Jarl Balgruuf the Greater at Dragonsreach in Whiterun where he conducts studies regarding magic and dragons.
Irileth is a Dunmer nightblade and a resident of Whiterun who lives in Dragonsreach. She acts as housecarl to Jarl Balgruuf the Greater, and rarely leaves his side.Being early battle comrades, Irileth and Balgruuf agreed that she would be assigned as his Housecarl. It is known that Irileth is more protective of the Jarl than most Housecarls. At some point in her life, Irileth was trained by the Morag Tong guild of Morrowind.Irileth is very serious about her job and her loyalty to Balgruuf, occasionally to the point of paranoia.
Balgruuf the Greater is the Nord Jarl of Whiterun Hold, residing in his great hall, Dragonsreach.According to his son Nelkir, he still worships Talos and hates the Thalmor as much as Ulfric and many other Nords do, if not more.Balgruuf has strong bonds with his friend and housecarl, Irileth, whom he fought alongside during their youth. As such, she rarely lets him out of her sight and berates him for a lack of concern for his personal safety.
Lydia is a Nord housecarl.
Proventus Avenicci is Jarl Balgruuf the Greater's Steward. His daughter, Adrianne Avenicci, runs Warmaiden's, a weapons and armor shop located in the Plains District of Whiterun.
Proventus can usually be found standing next to the Jarl's throne, in the Jarl's War Room behind the throne, in his bedroom in the back rooms of Dragonsreach, or dining on the Great Porch. Rewards for completing bounties can be collected from him in any of these places.
Jenassa is a Dunmer mercenary. She can be found in The Drunken Huntsman in Whiterun.She has a dark, murderous nature and has no qualms with any similar tendencies present in her employer
Uthgerd the Unbroken is a Nord warrior.located within The Bannered Mare in the city of Whiterun. Her house is located in Whiterun across from Carlotta Valentia's house.
Adrianne Avenicci is an Imperial blacksmith who owns and operates Warmaiden's in Whiterun. She is the wife and business partner of Ulfberth War-Bear.She is the daughter of Jarl Balgruuf's steward, Proventus Avenicci. She named her store, Warmaiden's, after her childhood nickname. Her father called her this due to her obsession with swords as a young girl. She is married to Ulfberth War-Bear. While she does not claim to be the best blacksmith in Whiterun, she aspires to be as good as Eorlund Gray-Mane one day.
Arcadia is an Imperial apothecary and an expert alchemist who runs Arcadia's Cauldron in Whiterun.
Belethor is a Breton who owns the Belethor's General Goods shop in the city of Whiterun.On occasion, he will jokingly say that he would sell his sister for gold, if he had one, and that he would be willing to buy any customers' relatives off them, should they have any. His reputation within Whiterun is far from sparkling, as the Whiterun Guards refer to him as a "sleazy little man." Unlike most Bretons, he isn't at all serious. He is constantly making puns and is very sarcastic, especially when he's asked why he moved to Skyrim or, after the Battle for Whiterun, if the siege was hard on the city's merchants.
Carlotta Valentia is an Imperial merchant in Whiterun.Carlotta says that she gets a lot of attention from men, and claims that half the men in Whiterun have proposed to her, yet all that matters to her is her daughter, Mila, and she is determined to let no man ruin her family.
Ulfberth War-Bear is a Nord merchant found in Whiterun.He is married to Adrianne Avenicci, and works the counter at Warmaiden's, though Adrianne is the actual owner of the shop.
Acolyte Jenssen is a Nord priest residing at the Temple of Kynareth in Whiterun. He is typically found in or around the temple all day. He is typically found standing over the bed of the Sickly Farmer performing healing spells, hammering the walls of the temple, or standing idly within it.
Andurs is a Nord priest of Arkay serving in the Hall of the Dead in Whiterun.Andurs watches and maintains the Hall of the Dead in Whiterun, and is a devout follower of Arkay. As such, he is responsible for preparing the bodies for the afterlife.
Danica Pure-Spring is a Nord priestess and healer of Kynareth found at the Temple of Kynareth in Whiterun.
Heimskr is a Nord priest and a preacher who can usually be found in the Wind District of Whiterun, delivering sermons about Talos. He is also an ardent supporter of the Stormcloaks, primarily due to the prohibition of Talos worship imposed by both the Empire and the Dominion.He lives in a small home located next to Jorrvaskr. Sometimes he can be found at the Bannered Mare inn having a meal and a drink, at which time he will engage in some amusing dialogue with the waitresses asking if a "strong man" can do anything for them; the waitresses make humorous jests at his expense, to which Heimskr mutters "Harpies, all of them."